Chapter 1: Introduction 0:00 Hello. Today we're going to explore an effect that might sound a bit boring, 0:04 4 seconds but is often highly overlooked as a creative tool, the gate. We'll be looking at the basic idea and controls of the effect first, and then we're 0:12 12 seconds going to check out a series of creative applications. Now, what exactly is a gate? Well, in a way, a gate is the opposite of a compressor. While a Chapter 2: What is a gate? 0:21 21 seconds compressor reduces the volume of a signal that exceeds a certain threshold, 0:25 25 seconds represented by the blue line here, a gate works the opposite way. it will reduce or even completely cut out the signal when it falls below that 0:33 33 seconds threshold level. I personally often use them when working with vocals to clean up noise in between phrases. Cuz when a 0:40 40 seconds vocalist records in a less acoustically controlled environment with a lot of background noise that might be coming from the street or an air conditioning 0:48 48 seconds unit, a gate can automatically silence a background noise or even breaths in between phrases. iPhone 0:56 56 seconds nita time zones limestone 1:05 1 minute, 5 seconds iPhone. Also, when working with drum recordings, gates are essential to, for instance, cut out bleed from symbols or snares in a kick drum mic. 1:15 1 minute, 15 seconds [Music] 1:29 1 minute, 29 seconds But there's a lot of ways to use a gate creatively, too. So, let's look at the basic controls first. The threshold is a key control here. Setting the volume 1:37 1 minute, 37 seconds level a signal must exceed to pass through the gate. 1:43 1 minute, 43 seconds The floor level determines to which volume the signal is reduced when the gate is closed. 1:56 1 minute, 56 seconds When set to minus infinity, the signal is completely cut out when it's below the threshold level. There's also a few timebased controls that you'll find in 2:05 2 minutes, 5 seconds pretty much any gate effect. The attack time controls how quickly the gate opens after the signal crosses a threshold. 2:13 2 minutes, 13 seconds [Music] 2:23 2 minutes, 23 seconds After the attack phase, the whole time kicks in, determining how long the gate stays open, even if the signal drops below the threshold level in the meantime. 2:34 2 minutes, 34 seconds [Music] 2:37 2 minutes, 37 seconds Once the whole time ends, the release time controls how long it takes for the gates to return back to floor level. 2:46 2 minutes, 46 seconds [Music] 2:52 2 minutes, 52 seconds On the left, we'll find the three last advanced controls. The look ahead will introduce a slight delay to the signal, 2:58 2 minutes, 58 seconds allowing the gate to respond more accurately to fast transients. There's also the flip switch, which lets you audition the part of the signal that's 3:06 3 minutes, 6 seconds being gated out. And the return dial sets the difference between the threshold level that opens the gate and the level that closes it, which can reduce choppiness in certain cases. 3:16 3 minutes, 16 seconds Cool. Now that we've covered the basics, 3:18 3 minutes, 18 seconds let's see how we can use the gates creatively in our music productions. Chapter 3: Bouncy pad 3:22 3 minutes, 22 seconds Okay, so let's kick things off with our first technique where we'll be using the gates side chain input to add some groove and movement to a static pad 3:31 3 minutes, 31 seconds sound. Now, for this example, I made a dusty house groove and added a pad sound to it, which sounds like this. 3:42 3 minutes, 42 seconds [Music] 3:46 3 minutes, 46 seconds I really like the chords and the tambber of this pad, but it feels a bit boring and disconnected from the drum groove. 3:52 3 minutes, 52 seconds To give it a bit more texture and excitement, I added two parallel instances of Sound Toy Crystallizer in an audio effect track. The first layer 4:01 4 minutes, 1 second creates a grain delay style effect and is pitched up an octave. While the second layer does the same thing, but is pitched up two octaves. To enhance the 4:09 4 minutes, 9 seconds stereo width, I panned one layer to the left and the other one to the right. 4:17 4 minutes, 17 seconds Now, let's add some groove using our gate effect. I'm going to add the gate to our pad sound channel and open up the little side chain submen. Now with the 4:26 4 minutes, 26 seconds side chain activated, the gate now listens to the track we send into its side chain input. Whenever the side chain signal now crosses the threshold, 4:34 4 minutes, 34 seconds the gate opens, allowing the pad sound to play in rhythm with the track that's sent into the side chain input. To give the pad some groove, we're going to need 4:42 4 minutes, 42 seconds to send a signal with rhythm and a lot of sharp transients into the side chain input. Cuz these transients will trigger 4:49 4 minutes, 49 seconds the gate by crossing the threshold. If I think about transients and groove, I immediately think of a drum break. So, 4:56 4 minutes, 56 seconds let's see which one I found. 5:04 5 minutes, 4 seconds The tone of the drum brake doesn't matter for this technique. We're only focused on the rhythm of the drum hits as they'll dictate the groove of our 5:11 5 minutes, 11 seconds pad. To enhance the transients even more, we can play around with the preserve settings and decrease the sustain of each drum hit. 5:23 5 minutes, 23 seconds [Music] 5:27 5 minutes, 27 seconds You want to make sure to mute the drum break as we're only using it to trigger the pads gate, not as a part of our song. Now, let's head back over to the 5:34 5 minutes, 34 seconds pad channel where we'll select the drum brake as the side chain input on our gates. And let's mess around with the settings to see if we can come up with the cool rhythm. 5:43 5 minutes, 43 seconds [Music] 5:48 5 minutes, 48 seconds By moving around the threshold, we can control which transients cross it. The lower the threshold level, the more even the quieter drum hits will exceed the threshold level and trigger the pad. 6:02 6 minutes, 2 seconds [Music] 6:05 6 minutes, 5 seconds A longer release time will make it sound smoother. 6:10 6 minutes, 10 seconds By increasing the floor level, we're sending back in some of the pad's body. 6:17 6 minutes, 17 seconds [Music] 6:32 6 minutes, 32 seconds Let's AB the pad with and without the gate. 6:37 6 minutes, 37 seconds [Music] 6:42 6 minutes, 42 seconds and paired with the drums. 6:51 6 minutes, 51 seconds Now, let's make the pad move along to the drum groove by side chaining it to the kick. 6:57 6 minutes, 57 seconds [Music] 7:19 7 minutes, 19 seconds By automating the release time, we can make the groove a little more dynamic and evolve over time. 7:27 7 minutes, 27 seconds [Music] 7:31 7 minutes, 31 seconds By holding option or alt and dragging, 7:34 7 minutes, 34 seconds we can turn a linear line into an exponential one. 7:37 7 minutes, 37 seconds [Music] 8:18 8 minutes, 18 seconds Let's delete this modulation and see what happens when we map an LFO. code to the release time. 8:24 8 minutes, 24 seconds [Music] 8:37 8 minutes, 37 seconds Tiny adjustments to the LFO's depth and offset parameters can have a big impact on the modulation. So, it's important to be precise to get the desired effect. 8:49 8 minutes, 49 seconds I personally love setting the LFO rate to a non- integer value for a cool poly rhythmic groove. 9:00 9 minutes [Music] 9:06 9 minutes, 6 seconds You can further adjust the groove by rearranging the drum brake that's triggering the pad, allowing you to experiment with different rhythms and timings to shape the overall feel. 9:16 9 minutes, 16 seconds [Music] 9:39 9 minutes, 39 seconds The only thing we're still lacking in this musical idea is a nice and warm baseline. So, I've added in some sustained bass notes to go along with the chords. 9:57 9 minutes, 57 seconds If you don't have speakers or headphones with good bass response, it can be helpful to use an EQ to visually check if you're hitting the octave with the 10:04 10 minutes, 4 seconds best subcontent for the notes you're using. I like using the MIDI pigeon device to quickly shift the notes an octave up or down without having to go 10:12 10 minutes, 12 seconds into the MIDI clip and doing it manually. 10:17 10 minutes, 17 seconds By shifting the notes down an octave, we can clearly hear and see that we're hitting the right frequency range and getting those warm deep subs that we 10:25 10 minutes, 25 seconds want. Next up, I'll add an auto filter to isolate only the deepest low end of the sound. 10:35 10 minutes, 35 seconds I'll use the MS2 filter type, which is inspired by the iconic Corg MS-20 filter. And I'll increase the drive to add some extra fatness and volume. 10:50 10 minutes, 50 seconds To give the bass the same rhythm as the pad, I'll copy over both the modulated gate and the compressor that side chain to the kick. 11:02 11 minutes, 2 seconds [Music] 11:06 11 minutes, 6 seconds Let's see what the bass and the pad sound like when combined. 11:16 11 minutes, 16 seconds It's sounding a little muddy in the low end, but we can fix this by EQing out some of the bass from our pad. 11:28 11 minutes, 28 seconds [Music] 11:34 11 minutes, 34 seconds [Music] 11:35 11 minutes, 35 seconds Cool. The bass now grooves perfectly with the pad. So, let's listen to the entire loop and hear how it all comes together. 11:43 11 minutes, 43 seconds [Music] 11:59 11 minutes, 59 seconds Now, in this case, we're using a drum break played by an actual person, which gives us a more organic rhythm. However, Chapter 4: Stuttering synth 12:06 12 minutes, 6 seconds if you're aiming for a more sequenced robotic groove, you can trigger the pad's gate with a programmed pattern. To demonstrate this, I made a quick trappy idea that sounds like this. 12:18 12 minutes, 18 seconds [Music] 12:29 12 minutes, 29 seconds For the synth chords, I used a very basic melt patch, applied some EQing, a little chorusing, and side chain them to the kick. But let's group these effects 12:38 12 minutes, 38 seconds and get them out of the way. The bass is an Ableton preset called 808 Drifter that is being ducked by the kick. 12:49 12 minutes, 49 seconds [Music] 12:51 12 minutes, 51 seconds Now, let's make the chords move by adding a gate to the channel and routing the high hats into its side chain input. 13:21 13 minutes, 21 seconds If you'd rather have the gate triggered by a pattern that isn't audible in the track, you can duplicate the high hat track, mute it, and rename it gate 13:29 13 minutes, 29 seconds trigger. We'll delete all the notes in the pattern. If we then head back over to the core channel and set the gate side chain input to the gate trigger 13:37 13 minutes, 37 seconds track, it will allow us to create a pattern that controls the rhythm of the pad without being audible in the mix. 13:43 13 minutes, 43 seconds Let's make use of Live's new MIDI generative tools and have it generate a pattern for us. 13:53 13 minutes, 53 seconds By playing around with the steps, 13:55 13 minutes, 55 seconds density, and pattern dials, we can easily tweak the rhythm to find the groove that works best for us. 14:13 14 minutes, 13 seconds [Music] 14:26 14 minutes, 26 seconds Let me quickly show you how I use this technique to create a choppy baseline in my track home. Again, by gating the high end of my bass to a simple 16th note 14:35 14 minutes, 35 seconds highhat loop, I created a robotic rhythmic groove. 14:41 14 minutes, 41 seconds [Music] 14:59 14 minutes, 59 seconds If you're a fan of these sequenced gate rhythms, definitely check out Gate Lab, 15:03 15 minutes, 3 seconds which is a free plugin by Audio Modern that comes with a bunch of cool presets and stereo options. Chapter 5: Textured drums 15:10 15 minutes, 10 seconds Now, there's a couple of cool things we can do by combining gates and reverbs. And to demonstrate, I created a dreamy, 15:17 15 minutes, 17 seconds spacious lowfi loop using sounds and loops taken from the golden sample pack I recently made for Zenheiser, which you can find on Splice 2, by the way. So, 15:27 15 minutes, 27 seconds let's have a listen. 15:33 15 minutes, 33 seconds [Music] 15:52 15 minutes, 52 seconds It's still a pretty open and rough idea at this point, but there are a few things we can do to jazz it up a I've layered in a field recording of some 16:00 16 minutes crackle, which has a sweet amount of airy top end to it, which will add nice texture and perfectly complement the lowfi character of the drums. Now, let's 16:09 16 minutes, 9 seconds use a couple of gate instances to make the crackle groove in sync with the drum hits. I'll route the kick to its side chain input and tweak the controls until it blends in nicely with the kick. 16:22 16 minutes, 22 seconds [Music] 16:37 16 minutes, 37 seconds Now, let's do the same thing to the snare. Just keep in mind that when using multiple gates on a single channel, 16:42 16 minutes, 42 seconds we'll need to set them up in parallel using an audio effect track. If we stack them in series, one after the other, the second gate won't open when the snare 16:50 16 minutes, 50 seconds hits because the first gate is silencing everything in between the kicks. 17:06 17 minutes, 6 seconds Now that our snare has some nice crackly texture to it, let's duplicate the chain one last time and add some texture to 17:13 17 minutes, 13 seconds the high hats. As we're using a very small and short high sample here, I'm already going to decrease the hold and release times. 17:36 17 minutes, 36 seconds [Music] 17:44 17 minutes, 44 seconds Now, let's listen to the entire drum groove with and without the gated crackle. 18:13 18 minutes, 13 seconds The drums are sounding quite dry at the moment, and since we're aiming for a dreamy, spacious vibe, adding some reverb to the snare might not be a bad 18:21 18 minutes, 21 seconds idea. I've been using the Sound Toy Superplay reverb a lot lately. So, I'm going to add it to the snare using an audio effect track. As usual, we'll 18:29 18 minutes, 29 seconds create a chain for the dry signal and a chain for the 100% reverb signal. 18:37 18 minutes, 37 seconds [Music] 18:43 18 minutes, 43 seconds Before we dive into gating, I'll clean up the reverb with some subtle EQing. 18:47 18 minutes, 47 seconds There's often some muddiness to be found around 200 hertz, so I'll cut a bit there. And dipping a few dBs in the 1k to 5k range can help smooth things out a 18:56 18 minutes, 56 seconds bit. Especially when working with vocals, removing some of the harshness in the reverb can make a big difference as it creates space for the vocal to cut through the mix. 19:09 19 minutes, 9 seconds without EQ and with EQ 19:16 19 minutes, 16 seconds a lot smoother. By adding a gate right before the reverb and tweaking the settings until we're left with just a short sharp click, we can dramatically alter the character of the decay. 19:28 19 minutes, 28 seconds [Music] 19:34 19 minutes, 34 seconds You really want to push the settings to the extreme here to get the shortest click possible. 19:43 19 minutes, 43 seconds Let's AB real quick. 19:49 19 minutes, 49 seconds If we now modulate the release, the reverb's character will evolve over time. 19:55 19 minutes, 55 seconds [Music] 20:04 20 minutes, 4 seconds I'll add an LFO, map it to the release time, and play around with the settings. 20:20 20 minutes, 20 seconds [Music] 20:33 20 minutes, 33 seconds By setting the waveform to random, the reverb's character will change unpredictably with each hit, adding a bit of variation and keeping the sound dynamic throughout the song. 20:51 20 minutes, 51 seconds These small modulations might seem subtle, but they can really add an organic human touch to your song. Now, 20:57 20 minutes, 57 seconds instead of going for a plate style reverb, let's try a spring reverb. It's definitely one of those love it or hate it effects, but personally, I'm a big 21:05 21 minutes, 5 seconds fan. So, let's give it a shot and see what works here. Normally, I'd reach out for one of my outboard spring reverbs, 21:11 21 minutes, 11 seconds but for the sake of this video, we'll use Arttoria's spring reverb plugin. 21:15 21 minutes, 15 seconds It's super flexible and really captures that classic spring reverb sound almost perfectly. I'm going to set the width to 21:22 21 minutes, 22 seconds stereo and the blend to 100% reverb as we're using it on a parallel channel. 21:29 21 minutes, 29 seconds [Music] 21:39 21 minutes, 39 seconds The shorter the click, the more rubbery and boinky the spring reverb will sound. 22:00 22 minutes Let's listen to it in context. 22:03 22 minutes, 3 seconds [Music] 22:12 22 minutes, 12 seconds I'm going to bring the reverb down just a notch. 22:20 22 minutes, 20 seconds [Music] 22:33 22 minutes, 33 seconds And there we go. We've added a nice high crackly texture to the drums and turned the reverb into something a little more dynamic and interesting just by using a 22:41 22 minutes, 41 seconds gate. Now, by swapping out the position of the gate and the reverb and thus placing the gate after the reverb, we Chapter 6: Classic 80's gated reverb 22:48 22 minutes, 48 seconds can easily create that classic 80s snare sound. 22:55 22 minutes, 55 seconds Here's a very disco inspired drum loop that I put together. I added the lexicon reverb to the clap that hits on every second snare and narrow down the reverb 23:04 23 minutes, 4 seconds using the utility tools with control. If I turn on the gate after the reverb, it will suddenly cut off, creating an almost claustrophobic effect. 23:19 23 minutes, 19 seconds The hold and release parameters will let you shape the reverb's tail. Chapter 7: Bursts of reverb 23:45 23 minutes, 45 seconds Now, lastly, I want to quickly show you one more reverb related gating trick that I use to enhance a chopped up synth loop in my track Dusty Echoes. Let me quickly show you. 23:57 23 minutes, 57 seconds [Music] 23:58 23 minutes, 58 seconds The sound you're hearing is a loop I recorded on an Eminem 310 organ and then ran through a chase bliss the delay pedal. 24:11 24 minutes, 11 seconds I added a parallel reverb to the syn loop and placed the gate before it so that only the loudest syn hits will trigger the reverb. 24:20 24 minutes, 20 seconds [Music] 24:28 24 minutes, 28 seconds This creates a rhythmic reverb effect instead of a long tail that washes out the entire loop. 24:35 24 minutes, 35 seconds [Music] 24:47 24 minutes, 47 seconds All right, enough about reverb. Let's switch gears and explore how we can use a gate to creatively layer electronic drums with an old drum break to add a gritty vintage character to our groove. Chapter 8: Glitchy drum fills 24:58 24 minutes, 58 seconds For this example, I cooked up a pretty lights Michael Menard's electro soul kind of vibe consisting of a halftime drum loop layered with a guitar, an 25:06 25 minutes, 6 seconds asset type sequence that I made using my modular synth, and a fluttery synth loop coming from my Moog Matriarch. 25:13 25 minutes, 13 seconds [Music] 25:24 25 minutes, 24 seconds We've got guitar chords with some echo. 25:29 25 minutes, 29 seconds [Music] 25:32 25 minutes, 32 seconds a raw synth sequence and some weird synth plucks. 25:46 25 minutes, 46 seconds [Music] 25:54 25 minutes, 54 seconds I then brought in a drum rig that I pitched down to match the tempo of the project, applied the gate, and routed the kick to its side chain input. 26:04 26 minutes, 4 seconds [Applause] 26:15 26 minutes, 15 seconds I duplicated the track and did the same thing for the snare. 26:19 26 minutes, 19 seconds [Applause] 26:21 26 minutes, 21 seconds [Music] 26:21 26 minutes, 21 seconds [Applause] 26:26 26 minutes, 26 seconds I could have combined the kick and snare gates into a single channel using an audio effect track just like we did earlier in this video, but I chose to separate them here. In a third channel, 26:37 26 minutes, 37 seconds I added the same drum brake but at double tempo, which sounds like this. 26:51 26 minutes, 51 seconds By isolating the shuffling parts of the break that happened in between our kick and snare and then applying a gate to focus in on the transients, we can create a cool glitchy percussive loop. 27:04 27 minutes, 4 seconds Do note that we're not using the side chain input here. 27:09 27 minutes, 9 seconds [Music] 27:10 27 minutes, 10 seconds [Applause] 27:12 27 minutes, 12 seconds [Music] 27:18 27 minutes, 18 seconds If we now bring the programmed drums back in, you'll notice how the gated break adds a raw organic touch and a nice shuffly rhythm to the mix. 27:27 27 minutes, 27 seconds [Music] 27:39 27 minutes, 39 seconds You could also manually chop out the parts of the brake that align with the kick and the snare, but using a gate makes it way more flexible as a gated 27:47 27 minutes, 47 seconds brake layer will automatically adjust to any changes you make in a MIDI pattern of your kick and your snare. 27:58 27 minutes, 58 seconds [Music] 28:01 28 minutes, 1 second All right, that wraps up this video on the creative use of gates. If you have any questions or other gate related tricks yourself, feel free to share them 28:10 28 minutes, 10 seconds in the comments. I'll see you all in the next video soon. Cheers.
